306 write content for how to run access esm (#409)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/models/running-a-model/running-access-esm.md

</div>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="runESM-3.0.0">Edit ACCESS-ESM configuration</span>
<div class="justified">
In order to modify an ACCESS-ESM configuration, it is worth understanding a bit more how its job scheduler Payu works.
</div>

### <span id="runESM-3.1.0">Payu</span>
<div class="justified">
<a href="https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/" target="_blank">Payu</a> is a workflow management tool for running numerical models in supercomputing environments.
<br>
The general layout of a Payu-supported model run consists of two main directories:
<ul>
    <li>
        The <b>laboratory</b> is the directory where all parts of the model are kept. For ACCESS-ESM, it is typically <code>/scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/access-esm</code>.
    </li>
    <li>
        The <b>control</b> directory, where the model configuration is kept and from where the model is run (in our case is the cloned directory <code>~/access-esm/esm-pre-industrial</code>).
    </li>
</ul>

> This separation allows to run multiple self-resubmitting experiments simultaneously that might share common executables and input data.

Author: I would not necessarily add the part about the home directory being backed up, but I will add the other reason for separating the control and laboratory folders.

    <terminal-line>Checking exe and input manifests</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updating full hashes for 3 files in manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Creating restart manifest</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updating full hashes for 30 files in manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
</terminal-animation>
<b>Note:</b> You can skip this step as it is included also in the run command. However, runnning it explicitly helps to check for errors.
</div>

### <span id="runESM-4.2.0">Run configuration</span>
<div class="justified">
To run ACCESS-ESM configuration for one internal run length (controlled by <code>runtime</code> in the <code>config.yaml</code> file), run:
<pre><code>payu run</code></pre>
This will submit a single job to the queue with a total run length of <code>runtime</code>. It there is no previous run, it will start from the <code>start</code> date indicated in the <code>config.yaml</code> file, otherwise it will perform a warm restart from a precedently saved restart file.
<terminal-animation>

>     <terminal-line data="input">payu run</terminal-line>

Author: Why do you need the `-f` flag?

    <terminal-line>payu: Found modules in /opt/Modules/v4.3.0</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>qsub -q normal -P &lt;project&gt; -l walltime=11400 -l ncpus=384 -l mem=1536GB -N pre-industrial -l wd -j n -v PAYU_PATH=/g/data/hh5/public/apps/miniconda3/envs/analysis3-23.01/bin,MODULESHOME=/opt/Modules/v4.3.0,MODULES_CMD=/opt/Modules/v4.3.0/libexec/modulecmd.tcl,MODULEPATH=/g/data3/hh5/public/modules:/etc/scl/modulefiles:/opt/Modules/modulefiles:/opt/Modules/v4.3.0/modulefiles:/apps/Modules/modulefiles -W umask=027 -l storage=gdata/access+gdata/hh5 -- /g/data/hh5/public/apps/miniconda3/envs/analysis3-23.01/bin/python3.9 /g/data/hh5/public/apps/miniconda3/envs/analysis3-23.01/bin/payu-run</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs</terminal-line>
</terminal-animation>
</div>

### <span id="runESM-4.3.0">Run configuration for multiple years</span>
<div class="justified">
If you want to run ACCESS-ESM configuration for multiple internal run lengths (controlled by <code>runtime</code> in the <code>config.yaml</code> file), you can use the option <code>-n</code>:
<pre><code>payu run -n &lt;number-of-runs&gt;</code></pre>

> This will submit a job to the queue (or multiple jobs, depending on the <code>runspersub</code> value specified in the <code>config.yaml</code> file), with a total run length of <code>runtime * number-of-runs</code>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will run the configuration `number-of-runs` times with a total run length of <code>runtime * number-of-runs</code>. The number of times payu submits a job to the queue depends on the <code>runspersub</code> value specified in the <code>config.yaml</code> file.
```

        <pre><code>payu run -n 20</code></pre>
        This will submit subsequent jobs for the following years: 1 to 5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15, and 16 to 20. With a total of 4 PBS jobs.
    </li>
    <li>
        <b>Run 7 years of simulation, with resubmission every 3 years</b>
        <br>
        To have a total run length of 7 years, with a resubmition cycle of 3 years, we can leave <code>runtime</code> to the default value of <code>1 year</code>, set <code>runspersub</code> to <code>3</code>, and run the configuration using <code>-n 7</code>:
        <pre><code>payu run -n 7</code></pre>
        This will submit subsequent jobs for the following years: 1 to 3, 4 to 6, and 7. With a total of 3 PBS jobs.
    </li>
    <li>
        <b>Run 3 months and 10 days of simulation, in one single submission</b>
        <br>
        To have a total run length of 3 months and 10 days, all in a single submission, we have to set <code>runtime</code> to:
        <pre><code>years: 0
            months: 3
            days: 10
        </code></pre>

>         set <code>runspersub</code> to <code>1</code> (or any value > 1), and run the configuration wihtout <code>-n</code> (or with <code>-n</code> equals <code>1</code>):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        set <code>runspersub</code> to <code>1</code> (or any value > 1), and run the configuration without <code>-n</code> (or with <code>-n</code> equals <code>1</code>):
```

    <terminal-line linedelay=0>&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;other-job-name&gt;&nbsp;&lt;$USER&gt;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;time&gt;&nbsp;R&nbsp;normal-exec</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0>&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;other-job-name&gt;&nbsp;&lt;$USER&gt;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;time&gt;&nbsp;R&nbsp;normal-exec</terminal-line>
</terminal-animation>
If you changed the <code>jobname</code> in the PBS resources of the <a href="#runESM-3.2.0">Master Configuration file</a>, that will be your job's <i>Name</i> instead of <code>pre-industrial</code>.
<br>
<i>S</i> indicates the status of your run:
<ul>
    <li>Q &rarr; Job waiting in the queue to start</li>
    <li>R &rarr; Job running</li>
    <li>E &rarr; Job ending</li>
</ul>
If no listed job has your <code>jobname</code> (or if there is no job submitted at all), your run might have successfully completed, or might have been terminated due to an error.
</div>

> 

Reviewer: payu saves the standard output and standard error (what would normally be printed to the terminal if the model was run interactively) into the files `access.out` and `access.err` in the <i>control</I> directory as the model is running. It is possible to examine these files as the run progresses to check on it's status.
